# Our first program

If you did Exercise [0.1](https://github.com/Professor-Bavario/0.1-Our-first-C-Program), you should have ended up with something like this:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main () {
    // TODO: Write the message into the double quotes ("")
    printf("Hello World!\n");
    // TODO: Set status code to 0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)
    return 0;
}
```

We will now go through this program 1 by 1 and I will explain exactly what each statement means.

Some will explained in more detail in their dedicated .md files, so make sure you read those as well for the full explanation!

---
```c
// TODO: Write the message into the double quotes ("")
```
This is a **comment**. These can be left in by the programmer and will never be read by the compiler.

You can add a comment by writing it after `//` somewhere. Everything in the line after the two slashes is a comment.

```c
printf("Bringle"); // This prints a name
```

You can also add comments that span multiple lines using `/*` at the beginning and `*/` at the end:

```c
/* This is a
multiline
comment!
*/
```
---
```c
#include <stdio.h>
```
This includes a **header**, in this case a **standard library header**.

A header defines functions that you can use in your code. In our case, we include the **standard input/output** header, so that we can use the function `printf` later on in the code.

**Full explanation on headers: [here](1.4%20Headers.md).**

---
```c
int main () {
```
This is defining a function with a return type, a name, its arguments, and a body.

`int` is the integer type, which means an integer will be returned after the function finishes. **An explanation of types and functions can be found [here](1.2%20Types,%20Variables%20and%20Functions.md).**

`main` is the name of the function.

Inside the brackets `()`, arguments can be specified that need to be passed to the function. In this case we don't provide any, which means **anything** can be passed to it - we do not care.

The opening curly bracket `{` now specifies the start of the **function body**. The body contains the code that should be executed inside of a function. It is closed again later with `}`.

**`main` in this case is a special function: It is called by the Operating System when our program starts. So this is the first function that will be called.**

---
```c
printf("Hello World!\n");
```
This is a classic function call.

We first name the function we want to call - in this case `printf`. (`printf` is defined in `<stdio.h>` and prints something to the console.)

Then, inside of the of the brackets `()`, we specify the arguments we want to pass to this function. In our case, we pass a string that we denote with `""`. `printf` actually supports an endless amount of arguments. **For more, read [1.6 printf and scanf](1.6%20printf%20and%20scanf.md)**.

**After every statement, a `;` has to be written.**

---
```c
    return 0;
}
```
This tells our `main` function to return the integer value `0` and then we close the function body.

For `main`, the value we return is the **program status**. If we return `0`, it means everything worked. If we don't, that means something went wrong and you can use the status returned to figure out what the issue is.