# Types, Variables and Functions

C is a **strongly typed** language. This means that all data has a fixed type that cannot change. For example:

```c
int number = 3;
number = "Hello World";
```
This won't work (as expected), because `number` is of type `int` and cannot suddenly change to a string type.
**Everything has a fixed type in C**.

## Types
There are multiple types that exist in C. Here is a little cheat sheet:
### `void`
Quite literally nothing. It does have uses though, which will be relevant later!
### `int` or `long`
An integer is a whole number. You can declare it like this:
```c
int test = 3;
```
By default, an `int`/`long` is usually **4 bytes or 32 bits** in size. This means they can represent any number from -2³¹ to 2³¹-1.

You can adjust the size of the integer type and whether negative numbers can be represented by using **[type modifiers](#modifiers)**.

**If you go above the upper limit of your integer type, this will result in a *Overflow* and it will wrap back around to the lower limit.**

**Likewise, an *Underflow* occurs when you go below the lower limit.**
```c
int one = 2147483647 + 1;   // Will overflow to -2147483648
int two = -2147483648 - 1;  // Will underflow to 2147483647
```

### `float` and `double`
These types can be used to represent numbers with a decimal point.

`float` is a 32-bit type with *single* precision.
`double` is a 64-bit type with *double* precision.

```c
float one = 1.5f;
double two = -8.75;
```

There is no `unsigned` this time - both types can represent positive and negative values.

*If you want to learn more about how floats work under the hood --> [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating-point_arithmetic)*

#### Converting to/from integers
If you want to convert floats to integers, you can do this implicitly, but doing so will completely remove the decimal component:
```c
int one = 3.5f; // one == 3
```
If you want to round properly, you can use the `round` function from `<math.h>`:
```c
#include <math.h>
int rounded = round(3.5f); // rounded == 4
```

Converting from integer to float can be done implicitly too:
```c
float one = 3; // one == 3.0f
```

### `char`
`char` is a bit of a special type. It can be interpreted in one of two ways:

1. As an 8-bit integer type that can represent numbers in the range `[-128, 127]` - or if `unsigned`: `[0, 255]`.
2. As a character that is part of the ASCII encoding. For example, if you set a `char` variable to value `65`, it will represent the character `A`:
```c
char a = 65;
// is equivalent to
char a = 'A';
```
You can find an ASCII table [here](https://www.ascii-code.com/) or on Linux by running `man 7 ascii` in a terminal.

### `bool` (when including `<stdbool.h>`)
A `bool` is a non-standard type you can include using the standard library `<stdbool.h>`.

In C, a `bool` is an 8-bit integer type of which you can only use 1 bit. This means that a bool can only have two values: `0` or `1`.

`<stdbool.h>` also defines the keywords `true` and `false` that can be used instead of `1` and `0` respectively.

```c
#include <stdbool.h>
bool one = true;
bool two = false;
bool three = 69; // Will turn into 1
```

## Variables
A variable holds a value of a certain type.
```c
[<modifiers>] <type> <name> [= <value>];
```
For example, this is a variable named `test` that has type `int`, no modifiers and the initial value `3`:
```c
int test = 3;
```
You can also omit the initial value to simply declare the variable:
```c
int test;
```
Variables are **scoped**, which basically means they are only accessible in the scope where you've declared/defined them.
```c
int main () {
    int variable = 3;
}
variable = 4; // Impossible because variable is only accessible in main()!
```
### Modifiers
Modifiers can adjust a type to your needs.

#### `const`
Can be used on any type to declare it a constant. This means the variable can only be read, and never written to:
```c
const int test = 3;
test = 4; // Compiler error
```
#### `short` (for `int`)
Decreases the size of the type in memory from 4 bytes to 2 bytes:
```c
int one;        // Can represent any number from -2³¹ to 2³¹-1
short int two;  // Can represent any number from -2¹⁵ to 2¹⁵-1
```
#### `long` (for `int` and `double`)
Increases the size of the type in memory:
```c
long int one;   // Can represent any number from -2⁶³ to 2⁶³-1
long double two;// From 64 bit precision to 128 bit precision
```
#### `signed` (implicit for `int` and `char`)
Allows you to represent both negative and positive numbers. This is the default for `int` and `char`, so you don't need to write it seperately:
```c
signed int one;     // Can represent any number from -2³¹ to 2³¹-1
int two;            // Can represent any number from -2³¹ to 2³¹-1
signed char three;  // Can represent any number from -2⁷ to 2⁷-1
char three;         // Can represent any number from -2⁷ to 2⁷-1
```

#### `unsigned` (for `int`, `short int` and `char`)
Allows you to represent positive numbers (and 0) only, but increases your upper limit:
```c
unsigned int one;       // Can represent any number from 0 to 2³²-1
unsigned short int two; // Can represent any number from 0 to 2¹⁶-1
unsigned char three;    // Can represent any number from 0 to 2⁸-1
```

*Note: `int` can be removed from the type if you add any modifier:*
```c
unsigned number;
// is equivalent to:
unsigned int number;
```
```c
short number;
// is equivalent to:
short int number;
```

## Functions
Functions take in arguments, run code with them and return a value (or nothing).
```
<type> <name> ([<arguments>]) {
    <code>
}
```
For example, a function that you have already seen before - the function called main that takes in any amount of arguments and returns an int:
```c
int main () {
    // Some code here
}
```
Functions can be called like this:
```
<name>(<arguments>);
```
For example:
```c
printf("Hello World!\n");
```
### Declarations
You can leave out the function body that contains the code to only *declare* the function:
```c
int someFunc();
```
You can then *define* the function later:
```c
int someFunc();
// ...
int someFunc () {
    // Some code
}
```
### Procedures
A procedure is a special form of function that returns **nothing**, in other words its return type is `void`:
```c
void someFunc () {
    // Some code
}
```
They can still take in arguments, though.

### Arguments
Any given argument is formatted like this and seperated with commas:
```
<type> <name>
```
For example:
```c
void someFunc (int one, int two) {
    // Some code
}
```
Arguments are **[variables](#variables)** whose values are determined by the function call:
```c
someFunc(3, 4); // This sets one = 3 and two = 4
```

### Special cases
If no arguments are specified, like we did previously with the main function, then they can take in any arguments with any type (although you will not be able to do anything with them):
```c
void someFunc () {
    // Some Code
}
```
This means that all of these function calls are valid:
```c
someFunc();
someFunc(1, 2, 3);
someFunc(1, 'A', 'C', 3);
someFunc("Hello World!\n");
```
If you want a function to accept no arguments, add a void argument (without a name!):
```c
void someFunc (void) {

}
```
Functions can also accept an **infinite amount** of arguments if you specify an *elipsis*:
```c
void someFunc (...) {
    // Some Code
}
```
All of these function calls are valid (and this time, the arguments can actually be used through methods we will look at more later):
```c
someFunc();
someFunc(1);
someFunc(1, 2);
someFunc(1, 2, 3);
```
**This is used for [`printf` and `scanf`](1.6%20printf%20and%20scanf.md) for example.**

### *Excursion: Function type*

*Functions can also be used as types for variables, like this:*
```c
<return_type> (*<name>)(<arguments_without_names>);
```
*For example:*
```c
void (*someFunc)(int, int);
```
*This declares the variable `someFunc` with the type being a function that takes in two `int`s and returns nothing (`void`).*