# Types and Variables

C is a **strongly typed** language. This means that all data has a fixed type that cannot change. For example:

```c
int number = 3;
number = "Hello World";
```
The latter statement will issue a *compiler warning*, because `number` is of type `int`, but we try to set it to a string value.

#### Try for yourself:
Open `exercises/1.2.1.c` and try to set the variable `number` to all kinds of different values. What gets printed to the console?

We will touch on what exactly what happens here later on, but the important takeaway is: **Everything has a fixed type in C**.

## Types
There are multiple types that exist in C. Here is a little cheat sheet:
### `void`
Quite literally nothing.
### Integer types
There are multiple types we can use for integers depending on their size:
- `int` or `long` *(4 bytes/32 bits)*: A standard integer. Can represent numbers in the range `[-2^31, 2^31 - 1]`.
- `long long` *(8 bytes/64 bits)*: A 64-bit integer. Can represent numbers in the range `[-2^63, 2^63 - 1]`.
- `short` *(2 bytes/16 bits)*: A standard integer. Can represent numbers in the range `[-2^15, 2^15 - 1]`.

In front of every integer type, you can also specify the keyword `unsigned` if you only want to use positive values. For example:

```c
short one;          // Can represent any number from -32768 to 32767
unsigned short two; // Can represent any number from 0 to 65535
```

**If you go above the upper limit of your integer type, this will result in a *Overflow* and it will wrap back around to the lower limit.**

**Likewise, an *Underflow* occurs when you go below the lower limit.**
```c
unsigned short one = 65535 + 1; // Will overflow to 0
short two = -32768 - 1;         // Will underflow to 32767
```

### `float` and `double`
These types can be used to represent numbers with a decimal point.

`float` is a 32-bit type with *single* precision.
`double` is a 64-bit type with *double* precision.

```c
float one = 1.5f;
double two = -8.75;
```

There is no `unsigned` this time - both types can represent positive and negative values.

*If you want to learn more about how floats work under the hood --> [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floating-point_arithmetic)*

#### Try for yourself
Open `exercises/1.2.2.c` and run it. What happens and why? Now try it again, but change the `float` types to `double`.

### `char`
`char` is a bit of a special type. It can be interpreted in one of two ways:

1. As an 8-bit integer type that can represent numbers in the range `[-128, 127]` - or if `unsigned`: `[0, 255]`.
2. As a character that is part of the ASCII encoding. For example, if you set a `char` to `65`, it will represent the character `A`:
```c
char a = 65;
char b = 'A';
// both a and b hold the same values
```
You can find an ASCII table [here](https://www.ascii-code.com/).

### `bool` (when including `<stdbool.h>`)
A `bool` is a non-standard type you can include using the standard library `<stdbool.h>`.

In C, a `bool` is an 8-bit integer type of which you can only use 1 bit. This means that a bool can only have two values: `0` or `1`.

`<stdbool.h>` also defines the keywords `true` and `false` that can be used instead of `1` and `0` respectively.

```c
#include <stdbool.h>
bool one = true;
bool two = false;
bool three = 69; // Will turn into 1
```