# `printf` and `scanf`

## Formatted strings
Ever wondered why C's print function is called print**f**?

Well the f stands for **formatted**. You can use different formatters to build up the string.

**Formatted strings are not supported by every function, only ones that are specifically made to support them.**
### Format Specifiers
These are placeholders for encoding different types of arguments that you can pass to the functions as seperate args. Here are some of them:
- `%c` for `char`
- `%d` or `%i` for `signed int`
- `%u` for `unsigned int`
- `%x` for printing integers in hexadecimal format
- `%f` for `float`
- `%lf` for `double`
- `%p` for pointers (more on those later)
- `%s` for strings
- `%%` for the `%` character

*A full list can be found [here](https://cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/printf/)*.

### Escape sequences
Unlike Format Specifiers, you can use escape sequences in any string. Each one encodes a special character. Here are some of them:
- `\n` - New line
- `\t` - Horizontal tab
- `\b` - Backspace
- `\"` - Double quote `"`
- `\'` - Single quote `'`
- `\\` - Backslash `\`
- `\0` - NULL Terminator

*A full list can be found [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escape_sequences_in_C#Escape_sequences)*.

## `printf` and variants
#### `printf`
Prints the given formatted string and its encoded arguments to the "standard output" (stdout). This is the standard function you'll use for normal printing to the console.
```c
int printf (const char * format, ...);
```
**Example:**
```c
printf("This is an int: %d\nThis is a string: %s\n", 69, "Bingle");
/* Will print:
    This is an int: 69
    This is a string: Bingle
*/
```
#### `fprintf`
Prints the given formatted string and its arguments into a file.
```c
int fprintf(FILE * stream, const char * format, ...);
```
*Note: You can use this function to specifically print error messages to `stderr`. We will talk about this more when we get into File I/O.*
#### `sprintf`
Prints the given formatted string and its arguments into a given string.
```c
int sprintf(char * str, const char * format, ...);
```
*Note: This function is **unsafe** and can cause a **Buffer Overflow**. We will talk about safety in a ton of detail in the future. The much better option is to use is:*
#### `snprintf`
Prints the given formatted string and its arguments into a given string. It prints at most `n` characters.
```c
int snprintf(char * str, size_t n, const char * format, ...);
```
## `scanf` and variants
#### `scanf`
Reads a string from the "standard input" (stdin) and places the read values into the passed variables.
```c
int scanf(const char * format, ...);
```
**Example:**
```c
int one;
char two[7];
scanf("%d-%6s", &one, &two);
// If the user enters "69-Bingle": one = 69 and two = "Bingle"
```
*Note: If you want to read a string, make sure you include the capacity in your sequence (like this: `%6s` if you have a buffer of size 7) to avoid buffer overflows.*
#### `fscanf`
Reads a string from a file and places the read values into the passed variables.
```c
int fscanf(FILE * stream, const char * format, ...);
```
#### `sscanf`
Reads a string from a variable and places the read values into the passed variables.
```c
int sscanf(const char * s, const char * format, ...);
```